Within the ongoing energy revolution
towards smart grids and renewables,
advanced technologies are required
to ensure the safety and reliability
of power distribution,
protection and control.
Evolving 5G technology
provides a foundation for new grid applications
and services to be developed.
By interconnecting devices
through secure,
reliable and low-latency
wireless communication infrastructure,
the design and operation of smart
grids will reach a new dimension.
One of the most demanding communication-based
protection principle is line-differential protection.
Distributed along the medium voltage line
relays exchange measurements
of current with each other.
All the relays compare the values
independently,
alarm in case of differences,
and initiate the de-energization
of the line section due to fault.
Traditionally, locating the faults on the line
has required heavy amounts of manual labor,
causing power outages to last a long time.
With centralized fault location,
the problems can be located in seconds.
Cost-effective merging units
along the power line
publish the digitized
voltage and current measurements
to the centralized smart substation devices,
which compute the fault location
and initiate the required actions.
To ensure reliable energy supply,
flexibility is essential in maintaining
the balance between variable
renewable generation and consumption.
A new method utilizes telecommunication
network multicast services
in transferring control messages
to a large amount of geographically
scattered devices in distribution grids.
This can provide short response times
and flexible deployment
of demand response control.
Safe transition towards utilization
of modern wireless communication
technologies in critical power systems
require years of studies,
prototyping and testing.
In Otaniemi, we have built a pilot environment
for testing 5G networks in power
system protection and control.
Our testbed contains relays,
merging units and smart substation devices,
supplemented by video
and sensor equipment.
A real-time simulator enables emulating
various power system architectures and fault scenarios.
Our 5G test network, advanced commercial
mobile networks in the area,
and multipoint quality-of-service
measurement system with various
traffic generation and shaping
possibilities provide a platform
for testing communication applications
under realistic conditions.
The pilot environment enables developing
new edge and AI solutions,
as well as hybrid testing of grid
and communication components in their
prototype phase, bringing cost
savings to product development.